Co-generation of Layout and Shape from Text via
Autoregressive 3D Diffusion
Zhenggang Tang1,2∗ , Yuehao Wang1,3∗ , Yuchen Fan1 , Jun-Kun Chen1,2 , Yu-Ying Yeh1 , Kihyuk Sohn1 ,
Zhangyang Wang3 , Qixing Huang3 , Alexander Schwing2 , Rakesh Ranjan1 , Dilin Wang1,† , Zhicheng Yan1,†
1
∗

Meta Reality Labs, 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, 3 University of Texas at Austin
equal contribution, † project lead

arXiv:2604.16552v2 [cs.CV] 29 Apr 2026

Recent text-to-scene generation approaches largely reduced the manual efforts required to create
3D scenes. However, their focus is either to generate a scene layout or to generate objects, and few
generate both. The generated scene layout is often simple even with LLM’s help. Moreover, the
generated scene is often inconsistent with the text input that contains non-trivial descriptions of the
shape, appearance, and spatial arrangement of the objects. We present a new paradigm of sequential
text-to-scene generation and propose a novel generative model for interactive scene creation. At the
core is a 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD+, which unifies the autoregressive generation
over a multimodal token sequence and diffusion generation of next-object 3D latents. To generate
the next object, the model uses one autoregressive step to generate the coarse-grained 3D latents in
the scene space, conditioned on both the current seen text instructions and already synthesized 3D
scene. It then uses a second step to generate the 3D latents in the smaller object space, which can
be decoded into fine-grained object geometry and appearance. We curate a large dataset of 230K
indoor scenes with paired text instructions for training. We evaluate 7B 3D-ARD+ on challenging
scenes, and showcase the model can generate and place objects following non-trivial spatial layout
and semantics prescribed by the text instructions.

1. Position the bed frame
at the center of the scene.
2. Place the quilt
over the bed and the
carpet under the bed.
3. Place the light modern
nightstand with drawers
on the carpet, to the
left side of the bed
4. Place the modern nightstand with drawers
on the carpet, to the right side of the bed

5. Position the light-blue
table lamp on the top surface
of the left nightstand,
towards its back-left corner

6. Position the light-blue
table lamp on the top surface
of the right nightstand,
towards its back-right corner
7. Arrange the decorative
floral arrangement on the duvet
of the bed, towards the foot of
the bed

Figure 1 We present a 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD+ to sequentially generate 3D objects from detailed

text instructions, which not only describe the object shape and appearance, but also prescribe complex spatial relations
between objects. 3D-ARD+ model generates a bedroom scene (left: occupancy voxel, right: appearance) precisely
following the text instructions.

1

Introduction

The creation of immersive 3D scenes is crucial in gaming (UKCMA., 2022; Bhat et al., 2025; Hu et al., 2024;
Li et al., 2025), virtual reality (Siddiqui et al., 2024; Zhou et al., 2024a, 2025c), and simulation for embodied
AI (Yang et al., 2024c,b; Nasiriany et al., 2024; Deitke et al., 2022; Szot et al., 2021). This scene creation
process is often interactive, where the user can compose a scene by sequentially adding objects with custom
shape, appearance, and spatial arrangement. Conventional workflows (Amirkhanov et al., 2025; Schönberger
1

et al., 2016) often involve a time-consuming process that requires 3D artists to manually compose the scene,
create detailed object geometry, and set up texture mapping. To reduce manual efforts, various text-to-scene
approaches are proposed to synthesize 3D scenes from text input (Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; Zhou
et al., 2024b; Yang et al., 2024a; Bokhovkin et al., 2025; Ling et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025b; Wang et al.,
2025b; Yang et al., 2025; Zhu et al., 2025), including models for layout generation (Tang et al., 2024a), and
object generation conditioned on layout (Zhang et al., 2024b; Hu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Wu et al.,
2024). However, fewer methods generate both (Vilesov et al., 2023; Fang et al., 2025).
For scene layout generation, earlier methods generate scene layout natively, but are limited to the layout of
large objects only (e.g. sofa) and simple spatial relations, such as 2D layout (Fang et al., 2025) and basic
relations (e.g. a chair next to the table) (Tang et al., 2024a; Vilesov et al., 2023). They often do not handle
more complex spatial relations, such as Position the table lamp on the top surface of the right nightstand,
towards its back-right corner (Figure 1). More recent methods (Zhang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025b; Zhou
et al., 2025b; Feng et al., 2023; Fu et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2025) exploit
LLM (Hurst et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2022) to extract scene information from text input and generate a
rough layout, which, however, often deviates from the text description, does not satisfy spatial relations, and
needs further heuristic optimization based on spatial constraints and object interactions (e.g. Scene motif
in (Pun et al., 2025), refinement in AnyHome (Fu et al., 2024)).
To generate objects conditioned on the scene layout, simple methods retrieve 3D assets from external
sources (Tang et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2025), which, however, often leads to the final
scene inconsistent with the textual description. Advanced methods distill 3D representation from multi-view
2D images (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Vilesov et al., 2023) or decode 3D representation from 3D
latent codes generated by diffusion models (Wu et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024). However, generated objects are
often limited to a predefined set of object categories (Fang et al., 2025; Bokhovkin et al., 2025; Yan et al.,
2024) or lack geometric details compared to text input (Wu et al., 2024).
To support the interactive scene creation with detailed object shape and appearance, we propose a novel 3D
AutoRegressive Diffusion model (3D-ARD+) to natively generate objects with diverse shapes and non-trivial
spatial arrangements according to the sequential text input. When the text input prescribes fine details about
the shape, appearance, and spatial relations of objects, we show that it is challenging for existing approaches,
while our 3D-ARD+ model performs significantly better. The 3D-ARD+ model processes the text instructions
sequentially. Each text instruction describes the shape, appearance and placement of a new object, and our
3D-ARD+ model autoregressively generates the placement, fine-grained geometry, and appearance of the new
object.
Under the hood, for each text instruction, our model processes the text tokens encoded from all seen text
input, and the 3D latents (Xiang et al., 2025) of the current scene to predict the 3D latents of the next object
in the large scene. A subsequent generation step is used to generate the 3D latents of the new object in the
smaller object space, which can be decoded into fine-grained 3D Gaussians. The newly generated object is
tokenized and appended to the multimodal token sequence to condition the future object generation in an
autoregressive manner. The 3D-ARD+ model adopts the DiT transformer architecture (Peebles and Xie,
2023) with causal attention between text- and 3D tokens, and unrestricted attention between 3D tokens.
To train the 3D-ARD+ model, we curated a proprietary dataset consisting of 230K indoor scenes. We prompt
a VLM to generate step-by-step text instructions to mimic the scene creation process. On the evaluation
set, which contains 50 sets of text instructions for composing non-trivial multi-object scenes, we extensively
compare our 3D-ARD+ model with several competing methods (Huang et al., 2025b; Xiang et al., 2025), and
validate the 3D-ARD+ model performs significantly better in preserving the spatial relations and generating
object geometry and appearance, even when object scale varies largely.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• We present a new paradigm for compositional text-to-3D generation through an autoregressive 3D diffusion
transformer, facilitating sequential object placement to synthesize complex scenes.
• We propose a co-generation approach of layout and shape based on our autoregressive 3D diffusion modeling
to achieve fine-grained generation results.

2

3D Asset

Text Tokens
3D VAE Latents

Gen. Tokens

3D VAE Latents

Und. Tokens
Multi-modal Transformer

3D VAE Encoder,
Noise Injection

Text Tokenizer

<|BOS|> Place
the tall display
pedestal at
center. <|EOS|>

𝜖𝑡1

Instruction 1

Occupancy
Volume of
Object 1

3D VAE Encoder,
Patchification

3D VAE Encoder,
Noise Injection

Text Tokenizer

<|BOS|>
Position the
plant on the top
surface. <|EOS|>

Instruction 2

…

3DGS
Decoder
3D VAE
Decoder

𝜖𝑡2
Occupancy
Volume of
Object 2

Latents

Figure 2 Overview of 3D-ARD model for coarse-grained scene generation. Left: at training time, the model takes text

tokens, 3D understanding tokens, and noised 3D generation tokens as input, and predicts a time-dependent noise.
Right: at inference time, the model iteratively transforms a random noise into 3D latents, which can be decoded by 3D
VAE decoder and 3D Gaussian (3DGS) decoder to generate a 3D object for each step.

• We develop a data pipeline to collect and process a large dataset of 230K indoor scenes with paired sequential
text-scene data, enabling large-scale training of our 3D generation model.

2

Related Work

2.1

Text-to-3D Generation

Early Text-to-3D approaches generate 3D objects by distilling 2D diffusion priors (Rombach et al., 2022; Peebles
and Xie, 2023), without any 3D training data, including DreamFusion (Poole et al., 2023), Luciddreamer (Wang
et al., 2023b), and many others (Lin et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Zhu et al., 2024; Liang et al., 2024). Multiview diffusion models (Shi et al., 2024b; Liu et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024b; Long et al., 2024) directly generate
pose-consistent image views, which can be used to reconstruct 3D objects either via optimization (Long et al.,
2024) or another multi-view transformer (Tang et al., 2025). Recent 3D generative models (Nichol et al.,
2022; Jun and Nichol, 2023; Xiang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a) learn to directly map text to 3D latents
or explicit 3D representations but are not capable of distinguishing individual objects and preserving the
spatial arrangement prescribed in the text. It is still challenging to apply such Text-to-3D approaches to the
task of interactive multi-object scene generation, where the user still needs to manually place the generated
individual objects into the 3D scene.

2.2

3D Indoor Scene Generation

Indoor scene generation approaches often leverage LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022; Hurst et al., 2024), 2D (Podell
et al., 2023; Rombach et al., 2022), and 3D generative models (Poole et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2025). While
some are focused on scene layout generation, others focused on generating objects or both. For scene layout
generation, autoregressive (Paschalidou et al., 2021) and diffusion (Tang et al., 2024a; Fang et al., 2025)
models are often used to generate a scene code and 3D object attributes. CG3D (Vilesov et al., 2023) uses
a diffusion model for compositional 3D object generation, but is often limited to modeling simple spatial
relations. With the tremendous advances in LLMs, many work exploit them for scene layout generation (Feng
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025b; Zhou et al., 2025b; Yang et al., 2024c; Li et al., 2024;
Hong et al., 2025; Çelen et al., 2024; Ran et al., 2025). Although LLMs improve the scene diversity, the result
is often not well aligned with the text input and requires further optimizations (Yang et al., 2024c; Çelen
et al., 2024; Ran et al., 2025). AnyHome (Fu et al., 2024) prompts the LLM to convert the input text into
structured representations, but still rectifies the room layout by Score Distillation Sampling (Poole et al.,
2023). HSM (Pun et al., 2025) uses a VLM to extract room type and objects from the text, but still needs
multiple steps to generate the final layout, such as extracting support region, generating scene motif and
optimizing the room layout. Our 3D-ARD+ model natively generates the next object conditioned on the seen
3

text instructions and already generated objects, and thus places the next object in the scene consistent with
the input.
To create 3D objects in the scene, (Tang et al., 2024a; Yang et al., 2024b; Ling et al., 2025) retrieve 3D assets
from asset libraries (Deitke et al., 2023b,a), but it lacks coherence to text instruction or between objects.
Instead, recent works generate 3D objects (Yang et al., 2024a; Zhang et al., 2024b; Vilesov et al., 2023; Wu
et al., 2024; Yan et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2025; Bokhovkin et al., 2025). BlockFusion (Wu et al., 2024) and
SceneFactor (Bokhovkin et al., 2025) generate 3D objects holistically as a scene, thus lacking geometric details
for individual objects, and requiring further refinement. SceneCraft (Yang et al., 2024a) reconstructs 3D
NeRF representation from multi-view images. CG3D (Vilesov et al., 2023), DreamScene (Li et al., 2024)
generate 3D objects with variants of score distillation sampling (Poole et al., 2023). In contrast, our 3D-ARD+
generates 3D latents, which can be decoded into 3D representation (e.g., 3D Gaussian) of individual objects
in the scene step-by-step, thereby maintaining the fine-grained details and high fidelity.
With the rise of video diffusion models (VDMs), generating 3D scenes from images or videos has been studied.
ArtiScene (Gu et al., 2025) extracts 3D attributes from isometric scene layouts and generates 3D objects
via image-to-3D model. StarGen (Zhai et al., 2025), HunyuanWorld-Voyager (Huang et al., 2025a) propose
long-range, pose-controllable VDMs whose frames can be turned into 3D Gaussian splats. However, these
two-stage approaches are susceptible to error accumulation, and the quality of 3D reconstruction is limited by
the fidelity of the intermediate images or videos.

2.3

Multimodal Generative Models

Since the success of visual generation models based on the text prompt (Ramesh et al., 2021; Saharia et al.,
2022; Rombach et al., 2022; Dai et al., 2023), it has been studied to generate visual contents beyond the text
input, such as reference images. Earlier work focused on building a specialized model for each set of reference
images (Gal et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023). However, such approaches are expensive and limited to making
reference to only a few concepts.
Following the success of LLMs, multimodal generative models are introduced (Hurst et al., 2024; Comanici
et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025a; Team, 2024; Shi et al., 2024a; Chen et al., 2025; Xie et al., 2025; Pan et al.,
2025; He et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025a; Wu et al., 2025a; Deng et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026). Compared to
earlier works based on fine-tuning, multimodal generative models are fast and flexible, as they take multimodal
inputs (e.g. reference image) in an in-context manner to generate multimodal outputs. Chameleon (Team,
2024), ILLUME (Wang et al., 2025a), MUSE-VL (Xie et al., 2025), and Janus-family (Wu et al., 2025a; Chen
et al., 2025) employ a discrete image tokenizer so that both text and vision modalities can be modeled using
a single autoregressive transformer. On the other hand, Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2025a), LMfusion (Shi
et al., 2024a), MetaQuery (Pan et al., 2025) and Bagel (Deng et al., 2025) develop models by combining the
best of both worlds, where the discrete (e.g. text) token is processed using next-token prediction, while the
continuous (e.g. image) token is processed via diffusion. The proposed 3D-ARD+ is inspired by the latter
that combines next-token prediction and diffusion for multimodal generation, but is designed to generate 3D
representation directly from our autoregressive-diffusion model.

3

Method

We tackle the task of sequential text-to-scene generation, and the goal is to generate individual objects in
a multi-step process based on sequential text instructions, which often prescribes the shape, appearance,
functional use and spatial arrangement of the new object at each step. We do not generate walls, floors and
ceilings since they can be easily generated by prior methods (Raistrick et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2024c; Fu
et al., 2024; Pun et al., 2025).
We propose a novel 3D Autoregressive Diffusion model 3D-ARD for coarse-grained scene generation (Figure 2),
and further extend it into a 3D-ARD+ model for fine-grained scene generation (Figure 4). Both are trained
using a diffusion objective (Liu et al., 2023). We address three key challenges below. 1): How to build a
model to generate the next object with coarse shape and appearance conditioned on the text input and the
already synthesized 3D scene (if any)? In Section 3.1, we present the 3D-ARD model architecture. 2): How to
4

generate objects with fine geometric details and appearance when the object size varies and the scene is often
much larger? In Section 3.2, we present an extended 3D-ARD+ model for refining the object geometry using
extra refinement steps. 3) The lack of training data with paired scene and sequential text input. In Section 3.3,
we introduce our data pipeline to curate a large-scale indoor scene dataset with paired text instructions.

3.1

3D-ARD: Autoregressive 3D Diffusion

We denote the sequential text instructions as {Tt }N
t=1 where N is the total steps. The text instruction Tt
for generating the next object often not only describes the shape and appearance of the object, but also its
spatial arrangement. An example from Figure 1 is “Position the light-blue table lamp on the top surface of the
right nightstand, towards its back-right corner.” Therefore, the next-object generation should be conditioned
on all seen text instructions and the already synthesized 3D objects (if any). Inspired by Transfusion (Zhou
et al., 2025a), we build a multi-modal transformer model that simultaneously processes text tokens XtT , 3D
understanding tokens XtU and 3D generation tokens XtG at each step t.
We tokenize the text string Tt into a sequence of discrete tokens with the BAGEL tokenizer (Deng
et al., 2025), and use standard embedding layers to convert tokens into vectors Embed(Tt ) of dimension C.
At each step, we concatenate text tokens of all seen text instructions to obtain XtT .
Text tokens.

At training time, for each of the existing objects {Ot′ }t−1
t′ =1 in the step t, we take a
3D binary volume Vt′ ∈ {0, 1}M ×M ×M , which represents the occupancy of object Ot′ in the whole scene, and
use a VAE encoder to encode it into low-resolution 3D latents St′ ∈ RD×D×D×CS . To reduce the number of
tokens, we process St′ using a patchification layer with non-overlapping patches of size 2, followed by a linear
projection layer to align with the text embedding dimension C. The 3D understanding tokens XtU include
tokens of all existing objects.
3D understanding tokens.

Inspired by TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025), the occupancy of an object in the scene can
be represented by a list of active voxels {pi }L
i=1 , where pi is the position index of a voxel, and L the total number
M ×M ×M
of active voxels. The sparse voxels {pi }L
,
i=1 are converted into a dense binary 3D volume V ∈ {0, 1}
D×D×D×CS
which is further encoded by a 3D VAE encoder into low-resolution 3D latents S ∈ R
. During
model training, we obtain the 3D generation tokens in the current step by applying patchification with a
patch size of 1 and linearly projecting a noised version of S into XtG . Note the generation tokens will be later
denoised and decoded to predict the occupancy of next object in the scene.
3D generation tokens.

We train the 3D-ARD model on a curated training dataset (Section 3.3) with paired scene
and sequential text instructions. Over the generation steps {t}, we autoregressively predict the denoised
3D latents of individual objects, which can be decoded into a 3D occupancy volume V in the scene. Unlike
Transfusion (Zhou et al., 2025a), which predicts both text token and image patches and thus applies objectives
on all output tokens, our goal is to generate the next object in the scene. Therefore, we apply diffusion
objective to the denoised 3D generation tokens only. Specifically, we model the 3D latents distribution using
the Rectified flow model (Liu et al., 2023), where in the forward pass a noised sample is obtained based on a
time-dependent linear interpolation x(s) = (1 − s)x0 + sϵ between a clean sample x0 (which is S in our case)
and a random noise ϵ. In the backward pass, the noised sample is denoised according to a time-dependent flow
v(x, s), which is approximated by the transformer backbone trained with the flow matching objective below.
Training recipe.

L(θ) = Es,x0 ,ϵ ∥vθ (x, s) − (ϵ − x0 )∥22

(1)

where θ denotes the learnable parameters.
The majority of the 3D-ARD model’s parameters θ are with the multimodal transformer
backbone, which consists of 28 blocks with self-attention (Peebles and Xie, 2023). To explicitly reveal different
types of tokens in the sequence, we insert BOS and EOS tokens to denote the beginning and end of text tokens.
Similarly, we insert BO3D and EO3D tokens for 3D understanding and generation tokens. We implement a
3D-ARD transformer.

5

Scene Space

Conditions: 3D und. tokens of
object 1, 2, …, 2t-1

Object Space

Zoom-in of conditions
at step 2t-1

Generation: object generated in
object space at step 2t

Figure 4 Fine-grained object generation in 3D-ARD+ model. 3D-ARD+ model generates 3D latents in the object space to

obtain more fine-grained geometry.

generalized causal attention between three types of input tokens (Figure 3). For text tokens, it uses standard
causal attention, including attention to the text tokens and 3D understanding tokens from earlier steps.
For 3D understanding tokens, it uses the standard
causal attention to text tokens, but unrestricted
attention to themselves, allowing every understanding token to attend to every other understanding
token in the scene. For 3D generation tokens, it
uses a standard causal attention to text and 3D
understanding tokens, since the generation of next
object should be conditioned on all seen text and already synthesized objects. They have unrestricted
attention to themselves, allowing every generation
token to attend to every other generation token.

Text
3D Generation
3D Understanding

At inference time, for each text
instruction Tt , we first sample a random noise ϵ as
x(1), and iteratively follow the approximate flow
Figure 3 The generalized causal attention used by 3D-ARD
vθ (x, s), conditioned on all past text tokens and
model. Tokens along the horizontal and vertical directions
3D understanding tokens, to update the sample
are input and output tokens, respectively.
x(s) until we obtain a denoised sample x(0). We
decode x(0) into a binary volume V via a 3D VAE
decoder to denote the occupancy of the object in the scene. To obtain the geometry and appearance of the
final object, we extract the active voxels {pi }L
i=1 from V , iteratively denoise a randomly initialized noise by
running the off-the-shelf TRELLIS 3D VAE decoder based on sparse flow transformer (Xiang et al., 2025)
conditioned on the current object text description to obtain the structured latent {(zi , pi )}L
i=1 , which can be
decoded into 3D Gaussians using the TRELLIS 3DGS decoder (See Figure 1).
Model inference.

3.2

3D-ARD+: Fine-grained Scene Generation

Due to computational constraints, the resolution of the generated object in the scene space V ∈ {0, 1}M ×M ×M
is limited (M =64 in our experiments), resulting in only coarse-grained object geometry for common objects
(Figure 7 Top). To address this limitation, we extend the 3D-ARD model by adding an extra step to generate
3D latents of the same resolution D×D×D in the smaller object space after each current generation step, and
the resulting model is referred to as 3D-ARD+ model. It uses a generation process of 2N steps for sequential
text instructions {Tt }N
t=1 (Figure 4). Below, we present details on how to prepare tokens at even steps {2t},
where fine-grained objects are generated.
At an even step 2t, we take text tokens of the instruction Tt already prepared at the step 2t − 1,
as well as two new special tokens BOR and EOR, which denote the beginning and end of refinement text, as
Text tokens.

6

1). Front View Selection

2). Captioning
Plant
Laptop

3). Spatial Reasoning

4). Assembly Plan

On the
table, left

On the table,
right

3. Place the
laptop on the
left side of
the table

At center

In front of
the table

1. Place the table
at the center

4. Place the plant
to the right of
the laptop

√
Table

Ergonomic
Chair

2. Position
the ergonomic
chair in front
of the table

Figure 5 Dataset construction pipeline includes four steps: (1) Front view selection, (2) Captioning, (3) Spatial reasoning,

and (4) Generating assembly plan.

the text tokens at the step 2t.
At an even step 2t, we first prepare 3D understanding tokens from all past odd
steps {2t′ − 1}tt′ =1 as in Section 3.1. For all past even steps {2t′ }t−1
t′ =1 , we take the groundtruth dense binary
3D volume V2t′ in the object space, and use a 3D VAE encoder to encode it into a low-resolution 3D latents
S2t′ . Similar to Section 3.1, latents S2t′ are further patchified and linearly projected to reduce the token
numbers and align the feature dimension.
3D understanding tokens.

To prepare 3D generation tokens, we take the groundtruth binary occupancy volume V
in the object space, encode it into low-resolution 3D latents S via a 3D VAE encoder, and apply the Rectified
Flow time-dependent linear interpolation to obtain a noisy latent. As in Section 3.1, We further patchify the
latents with a patch size of 1 and apply a projection to obtain the 3D generation tokens.
3D generation tokens.

3D-ARD+ model at both odd and even generation steps also attaches the conditional flow
matching objective (Equation 1) to the denoised 3D generation tokens to train the transformer backbone.
Model training.

Similarly to the inference of the 3D-ARD model in Section 3.1, the 3D latents generated in
the local object space are decoded into a binary occupancy volume V , where the active voxels with normalized
coordinates are extracted to be used by the TRELLIS 3D VAE based on sparse flow transformer to generate
structured latents. To put the fine occupancy volume in the scene space, we first calculate the bounding box
of the coarse one and then transform the fine one accordingly.
Model inference.

3.3

Dataset Construction

To enable sequential scene generation, we construct a high-quality indoor dataset with step-wise assembly
instructions. The raw data is from a proprietary indoor dataset, which consists of parts of a scene but lacks
assembling instructions. To generate the instructions, our data pipeline consists of four main stages (Figure 5).
Given multi-view renderings of each object group, we leverage a VLM to identify the
canonical front view that maximizes visual informativeness while minimizing occlusion. The model analyzes
specific cues such as furniture orientation (e.g. cabinet doors, bed headboards) to determine the optimal
viewing angle for subsequent labeling.
Step 1: View selection.

For each object in the scene, we generate multi-granularity textual descriptions by
presenting the VLM with both the complete scene view and individual object-focused views. The captions
capture essential attributes including object type, material properties, color, geometric characteristics, and
critically structural elements that support other objects.
Step 2: Object captioning.

7

…
Object id 1
Position a
brown wooden
bookshelf at
the center

2
Position a stack of
books on the 2nd layer
from the top, within the
leftmost compartment

3
… to the
right of
object 2

7

8

9

… on the
top layer,
leftmost

… on the top
layer, to the
right of object 7

… on the top
layer, to the
right of object 8

Final Scene

Figure 6 An example of step-by-step generation. Our 3D-ARD+ model closely follows the text instructions and adds a

total of 8 stacks of books to different compartments in a bookshelf.

We incorporate 3D bounding box data (including dimensions, center
positions, and spatial extents) to provide a precise geometric context for this spatial reasoning step. A
top-down visualization is also generated to facilitate it.
Step 3: Spatial relationship analysis.

Combining the visual observations, object captions, geometric context, and
spatial reasoning, the VLM generates a sequential assembly plan consisting of step-by-step instructions that
specifies the placement order from foundational objects to dependent components.
Step 4: Assembly plan generation.

4

Experiments

4.1

Implementation Details

We implement our approach in PyTorch (Paszke et al., 2019). We use the dense binary occupancy volume
V ∈ {0, 1}M ×M ×M with resolution M =64 to represent the occupancy of objects in the scene space or the
smaller object space. An off-the-shelve 3D VAE from TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025) is used to encode V
into a low-resolution continuous volume S ∈ RD×D×D×CS , where D = 16 and CS = 8. All text tokens, 3D
understanding tokens, and 3D generation tokens use the feature dimension 128.
3D-ARD+ model training. We use pre-trained multimodal transformer model from Bagel (Deng et al., 2025),
which contains 7B active parameters and 28 self-attention building blocks. We finetune it on our curated
indoor data for 120K steps with learning rate 1e − 4 using 128 Nvidia H100 GPUs for a week. The maximum
token size per sequence is 20,480.

KV pairs of text tokens for all seen text instructions are stored in the KV
cache (Pope et al., 2022). KV pairs of denoised 3D generation tokens are also stored. We utilize the Euler
sampler for generation, employing 50 sampling steps. The CFG coefficient (Ho and Salimans, 2022) is set to 4
for text conditions and 2 for 3D condition tokens, following the configurations in (Deng et al., 2025).
3D-ARD+ model inference.

Our dataset consists of 230K indoor scenes from typical room types (bedrooms, living
rooms, kitchens, dining areas, bathrooms). Each scene contains 2–15 parts with diverse compositions: adjacent
furniture (e.g. bed with nightstands), furniture-object assemblies (e.g. table with tableware), or grouped small
objects. Each scene is normalized together to be within the unit bounding box. Each part has a corresponding
assembly instruction (several to 40 words) describing its spatial placement. We also include a single object
data with 1M assets in our training data to enrich object-level diversity.
Indoor training data.

4.2

Evaluation Settings

We construct a held-out testing data by filtering out a subset of 50 unseen text instructions in the training
data for challenging scene composition tasks. These scenes span diverse room types (e.g. kitchen, bedroom,
living room), varying spatial scales (from groups of large furniture to groups of small objects), and different
object counts, ensuring comprehensive coverage of compositional complexity and spatial reasoning challenges.
8

3D-ARD

3D-ARD+

Figure 7 Comparing results from 3D-ARD and 3D-ARD+ models. Top: coarse-grained; Bottom: fine-grained.

Our evaluation set consists of sequential text instructions captioned by a VLM, as detailed in Section 3.3. See
examples in the appendix.

4.3

Baselines

We choose the largest Text-to-3D model TRELLIS (Xiang et al., 2025) as a baseline, which
is open-sourced with 2B parameters. To prepare the text input, we use a VLM to summarize all steps into
one instruction.
TRELLIS-text XL.

MIDI (Huang et al., 2025b) is a recent image-to-scene model to generate
multi-object scenes by segmenting the scene image using Grounded-SAM (Ren and et al., 2024), and applying
a multi-instance diffusion model (Huang et al., 2025b). To prepare the image input, we summarize all text
instructions into an overall description of the scene, and use a text-to-image model to generate a scene image.
MIDI: Multi-Instance Diffusion.

We reuse the 3D bounding boxes in the test set. Then we use the TRELLIS-text XL model
to generate 3D objects from object captions, and fit the generated object to the bounding box afterwards.
BB.+TRELLIS.

In this baseline, we first use the text instructions to prompt a LLM for generating
detailed object captions and predicting 3D bounding boxes. Then we use the TRELLIS-text XL model to
generate actual 3D objects from those captions, rescale and position each to fit its bounding box.
LLM-layout+TRELLIS.

4.4

Qualitative Results

Figure 6 demonstrates how 3D-ARD+ enables creation of a compositional scene by following a sequence of text prompts. As shown in the results, 3D-ARD+ follows text
instructions at each step, and can generate object shape and appearance close to the text instructions while
also placing the object based on the prescribed spatial arrangement.
3D-ARD+ sequential generation results.

In Figure 9, we qualitatively compare our 3D-ARD+ model with four baselines
as our primary evaluation. TRELLIS-text XL will hallucinate unrelated objects (e.g. paper towel in row
1) or generate objects inconsistent with the text input (e.g. more than expected pillows in row 2). MIDI
requires an image aligned with the text as the input. We empirically observe that when images generated
from text instructions by a VLM are used as input, MIDI may still fail to produce plausible object shapes
and placements. See more details in the supplementary. For BB.+TRELLIS, it is difficult to avoid object
collision after placing individual objects, generated by TRELLIS-text XL, into the scene according to the
groundtruth bounding box (e.g. row 3). For LLM-layout+TRELLIS, LLM can predict 3D bounding box
Comparisons with baselines.

9

Input GT. Condition

GT. Appearance Generation

Final Scene Generation

2) Position the long dining bench directly behind and aligned with the longer side of the rectangular dining table. It stands on the
floor and provides seating along one side of the table. 3) Place the modern dining armchair with a black upholstered bucket seat in
front of the rectangular dining table... 4) Place the modern dining armchair with a light blue upholstered bucket seat in front of the
rectangular dining table …

2) Position the flat-screen computer monitor on the top surface of the main segment of the L-shaped desk, centering it against the
back cubicle panel for optimal viewing. 3) Place the ergonomic office chair directly in front of the main desk surface of the Lshaped workstation, ensuring it is centrally aligned for comfortable user access and mobility within the workspace.

Figure 8 Conditioned next-object generation. Given the ground-truth fundamental object (table or desk) and subsequent

textual instructions, our model generates subsequent objects properly.

Quantitative comparisons on the indoor evaluation set. We report several metrics, including Kernel Distance (Bińkowski et al., 2018) with Inception-v3 (KID) and DINOv2 encoders, CLIP-text, and CLIP-image scores (Radford et al., 2021).

Table 1

KID (↓)

KDD (↓)

CLIP-text (↑)

CLIP-image (↑)

P-FID (↓)

P-IS (↑)

MIDI
TRELLIS-text XL
BB.+TRELLIS
LLM-layout+TRELLIS

1.308
1.543
1.694
1.376

98.721
96.928
101.287
88.425

22.607
22.086
20.726
22.645

74.896
73.306
66.555
71.896

17.661
11.267
19.430
12.564

2.281
2.508
2.553
2.435

Ours

1.244

49.021

27.447

76.103

2.837

2.596

of individual objects poorly for complex text input (e.g. row 1 vs. 3). Even the subsequent generation of
individual objects by TRELLIS-text XL are plausible, the spatial arrangement in the composed scene still
significantly deviates from the text instructions. In contrast, our method successfully captures object types,
shapes, appearance, and their spatial locations as specified in the text instructions, resulting in meaningful
compositional 3D generation.
Our model supports conditioned generation where the first 3D object is
given by the user, and subsequent objects are generated based on text prompts. In our implementation, we
first convert the input mesh condition into 64 × 64 × 64 grids, and transform the mesh using a user-input
layout (specified by translation and rotation matrices) to obtain coarse-level grids. Then, we can encode the
grids using our employed 3D VAE and prefill the corresponding 3D tokens with KV caching. After doing this,
the subsequent generation will be conditioned on the prefilled 3D tokens of the user input. Figure 8 presents
the results of our model for demonstrating this capability.
Conditioned next-object generation.

4.5

Quantitative Comparisons

We follow previous work (Xiang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024a) to choose our evaluation
metrics. For evaluating the visual quality of generated scenes, we conduct the evaluation of 3D generation
on their rendered images. We employ kernel distance metrics, including Kernel Inception Distance (KID)
Evaluation metrics.

10

Table 2 Ablation study of object-level training data and patch size, using CLIP-text and P-FID scores.

Method

CLIP-text (↑)

P-FID (↓)

w/o object-level training data
patch size for gen. tokens = 2

24.772
24.647

6.238
4.521

Final Model

27.447

2.837

(Bińkowski et al., 2018) using InceptionV3, and Kernel Distance with DINOv2 (KDD) encoders. For each
scene in our training set, we randomly place cameras from left, right, front and back views to render images
and construct the reference batch with 10K images. Similarly, we render random views for each baseline in the
test set to form the generation batch with 5K images. To measure the consistency between text descriptions
and generated scenes, we use CLIP scores, comparing both text and image references. To obtain a single
reference text description (rather than a list of instructions) and image for each scene, we first input the
textual instructions into a VLM to generate the corresponding images. We then query it to describe these
generated images, using the resulting descriptions as reference text prompts. For 3D-level evaluation, we
report PointNet++-based FID (P-FID) and Inception Score (P-IS). The reference set consists of 5K randomly
sampled test examples, and each model generates 1.5K-1.7K samples using the same test instruction subset.
To compute P-FID and P-IS, 4,096 points are randomly sampled from the reference and generated scenes.
We present our quantitative results in Table 1 as a secondary evaluation. Our method consistently
outperforms all baseline approaches across every metric, aligning with our visual comparison. Beyond improved
distribution alignment with the training data, as measured by KID, KDD, and P-FID, our model also achieves
substantial gains in CLIP-Text, CLIP-Image, and P-IS. These metrics are computed independently of the
training distribution, indicating that the improvements reflect enhanced generation quality rather than
overfitting to the training data domain.
Results.

4.6

Ablation Study

Ablating refinement stage (3D-ARD vs. 3D-ARD+). In Figure 7, we compare the results of 3D-ARD and
3D-ARD+ to illustrate the improvements introduced by the refinement stage. In the left example (the
ornament case), we show 3D-ARD+ generates more fine-grained objects with the designed refinement step.
The right example (the sofa case) shows that generating appearance directly on coarse geometry is likely to
cause artifacts in the resulting texture. In addition, the shape of the pillow after the refinement stage also has
smoother geometry, showing the effectiveness of our approach.

We conduct an ablation study on two key factors that affect generation
quality: (1) whether single-object data is included in the training set, and (2) the patch size used for 3D
generation tokens in the transformer. All models in this ablation study use the same hyperparameters and
model size as our final model described in the main text. Table 2 summarizes the results. The results suggest
two main observations. First, even without object-level training data, the model can produce reasonable
spatial layouts guided by text instructions, as indicated by competitive CLIP-Text scores. However, the
P-FID metric reveals that the generated shapes are of low quality. Second, our experiments show that using a
patch size of 2 for generation tokens (the exact setting used for 3D understanding tokens) introduces “patching
artifacts”, leading to severe holes in the decoded 3DGS results. Therefore, we adopt a patch size of 1 for
generation tokens, which significantly improves the final generation quality.
Ablating object-level data and patch size.

5

Conclusion

We present a novel Autoregressive 3D Diffusion model 3D-ARD+ for compositional text-to-3D co-generation
of layout and shape. A large-scale indoor scene dataset with paired text instructions is curated to train the
3D-ARD+ model. On a challenging evaluation set, the proposed 3D-ARD+ model significantly outperforms
other competing methods in both visual comparisons and quantitative evaluations. Our model can serve as

11

a base model for a series of future post-training work, such as physics-informed supervised fine-tuning for
generating more realistic scenes.

12

Text Instructions

Reference Image
(by a Public VLM)

MIDI

BB. + TRELLIS

LLM Layout
+ TRELLIS

TRELLIS-text
XL

Ours

1) Place the two-tiered, corner shower caddy
as the foundational support structure... 2)
Place the small, round bottle on the front-left
side of the lower shelf of the shower caddy. 3)
Place the small, cylindrical bottle on the
back-right side of the lower shelf of the
shower caddy... 4) Place the tall, cylindrical
bottle on the left-front side of the upper shelf
of the shower caddy. 5)... 6)...
1) Place the lavish three-seater sofa as the
foundational element of the scene... 2)
Position the rectangular decorative throw
pillow with an ornate, swirling abstract
pattern ... 3) Place … throw pillow … on the
sofa's seat ... 4) Place the second square
decorative throw pillow with a central
embroidered floral pattern on the sofa's seat...
5) … pillow ... on the far right section of the
sofa's seat...
(1) Place the light wood-toned rectangular
desk unit as the foundational base... 2) Attach
the light wood-toned open shelving unit onto
the left side of the desk unit's tabletop... 3)
Insert the flat, rectangular dark gray panel
into the right section ... positioning it directly
on the desk ...adjacent to the open shelving...

1) Place the rectangular nightstand … as the
foundational furniture piece, providing the
main surface for other items. 2) Place the
table lamp ... on the top surface of the
nightstand... 3) Position the rectangular photo
frame on the top surface …between the lamp
and where the plant will be placed. 4) Place
the decorative potted plant with lush green
leaves ... on the top surface of the nightstand,
... adjacent to the photo frame.

1) Place the modern side table featuring a
round, tray-like silver metal top and a
minimalistic wire metal base as the central
and foundational element of the scene,
providing the primary surface for other items.
2) Position the rectangular book ... on the top
surface of the side table, to the left of the
center. 3) Place the rectangular book ... on the
top of the first book...

1) Place the minimalist rectangular bench
with its white upholstered top and slim white
metal legs … green fabric runner, which is
draped over its right section…. 2) Place the
first decorative book … onto the green fabric
runner on the right side of the bench… serve
as the base for the next stacked item. 3) Stack
the second decorative book … directly on top
of the first decorative book…
1) Place the dark brown wooden media
console... 2) Position the modern flat-screen
television on the broad top surface of the dark
brown wooden media console, ... 3) Place ...
books horizontally on the lower left open
shelf ..., to the left of the television bay. 4)
Place ... books horizontally on the lower right
open shelf ..., to the right of the television bay.
5) Arrange ... books vertically on an upper
open display shelf of ... entertainment unit

Figure 9 Qualitative comparison. Visual results of our method and existing single-object generation and multi-object

generation approaches are presented with corresponding input text instructions and reference images generated by a
VLM. Bold text highlights object kinds, italic text shape/appearance descriptions, and underline locations.

13

Sample 1

Sample 2

Sample 3
1) Mount the wall-mounted decorative shelf as the primary
and foundational structure of the scene, ensuring it is level to
support subsequent items. This shelf provides the flat display
surface for other objects and implicitly includes the central
picture frame. 2) Place the decorative potted plant with vibrant
green leaves and a white pot onto the flat display surface of
the shelf, positioning it specifically on the left side, to the left
of where the picture frame is located. 3) Place the second
decorative potted plant with vibrant green leaves and a white
pot onto the flat display surface of the shelf, positioning it
specifically on the right side, to the right of where the picture
frame is located, mirroring the first plant.

1) Place the dark brown or black nightstand as the
foundational element of the scene, providing a stable top
surface that will support the lamp. 2) Position the white
ceramic table lamp centrally on the top surface of the
nightstand, ensuring it is stable and ready to provide
illumination.

1) Place the stylish armchair as the central and foundational
element of the scene, providing the main seating surface and
supporting all other items. 2) Position the soft, light grey
square cushion onto the seating area of the armchair, resting
against its backrest to provide comfort. 3) Drape the black and
white houndstooth patterned throw blanket over the left
armrest of the armchair, with a portion folded onto the seat, to
serve as a decorative accent.

Figure S1 Diversity of generation results. Three samples are generated for each sequence of text instructions, illustrating

the variations of output produced by our method. The first-row results are generated via conditioning on the groundtruth geometry of the base object. Results in the second and third rows are generated from scratch.

Appendix
A

More Results

A.1

Diversity of Generation

To demonstrate the generative diversity of our model, we provide multiple generations with different random
seeds from identical text instructions. Figure S1 shows that given the same prompt, our model produces
varied yet semantically consistent results.

A.2

Additional Qualitative Results

In addition to the comparisons provided in the main text, Figure S11 presents further generation results
produced by our method and various baseline approaches. In the presented cases, our method demonstrates
superior visual quality in synthesizing compositional scenes that follow the provided text instructions,
outperforming the baseline approaches. Furthermore, several baseline methods, including MIDI, BB. +
TRELLIS, and LLM Layout + TRELLIS, fail to generate output for certain instructions (either empty output
or crashes when querying models), revealing the instability of the baseline systems.

14

(a) View 0

(b) View 1 (Selected)

(c) View 2

(d) View 3

Figure S2 View selection example. Given four different viewpoint renderings of the same scene, our method selects
View 1 as the canonical front view.

(a) Part 0

(b) Part 1

(c) Part 2

(d) Part 3

Figure S3 Normalized input views for object captioning. Each part is extracted and normalized from the selected front
view to provide clear, focused views for detailed caption generation.

B

Data Curation Details

Our data curation pipeline leverages a VLM for all stages of processing, including view selection, object
captioning, and assembly plan generation. Below we detail the specific prompts and procedures used at each
stage.
Throughout this section, we use a nightstand scene as a running example to illustrate each stage of our data
curation pipeline. This scene consists of four objects: Part 0 is a blue hydrangea potted plant, Part 1 is a
rectangular picture frame, Part 2 is a modern table lamp, and Part 3 is a grey nightstand with a gold base
(the foundational furniture piece).

B.1

View Selection

To identify the canonical front view from multi-view renderings, we provide the following system instructions
along with 4 different viewpoint images. Figure S2 shows an example where our method selects the most
informative viewing angle from four candidate views. The complete prompt is shown in Figure S4.

B.2

Object Captioning

For each object in the scene, we generate multi-granularity (one in around 20 words, another in around 5 words)
textual descriptions. The model receives two types of images: (1) the entire scene view (all_together.png,
using the selected front view from Figure S2) showing the complete furniture group, and (2) normalized views
of each part (norm_part_x.png) as shown in Figure S3. The complete prompt is shown in Figure S7.
B.2.1

Example Generated Captions

Figure S8 shows example captions generated by our pipeline for a nightstand scene.

15

